
COM Name Arbiter Tool V1.0.5 - gives manual control over reserved COM port numbers
Freeware by Uwe Sieber - www.uwe-sieber.de


Whenever a new COM port is installed, Windows looks for the first
never used number. This ensures that there are no conflicts when
two of the devices are attached at the same time.

When COM device is uninstalled the reservation of its COM port isn't removed,
the result are endless increasing port numbers.

Since Windows 10 version 1903 there is a sub-key "Devices" here where it keeps
track of COM-ports and their devices and removes the reservation when a COM-port
device is uninstalled. Finally after 25 years... So under Windows 10 version 1903
and newer this tool should be not needed.



Windows stores used COM port numbers in the registry here:
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\COM Name Arbiter

By default there are 32 bytes with 8 bits in each byte. A set bit makes a
port number (1..256) reserved. Over time Windows might exceed 256 ports,
COM Name Arbiter Tool can handle this. Windows supports 4096 ports here.

Removing the reservation does not do anything else than making Windows
reassign the number to a new device when it is attached and offer it
for manual reassignment.
As long as the new device is not attached at the same time as the
device which had these COM port before there is no problem.

If the devices are attached at the same time then one of them will not
work. I've seen three diffent behaviours:
1: The second device fails to start because it cannot create the COMx symbolic link.
2: The second device starts but will not get assigned a COMx symbolic link, so it
   is operational but the serial port isn't accessible from Win32 apps.
3: The second device's driver removes the COMx symbolic link of the first device
   and creates it's own (seen with FTDI).

"Clear unused reservations" removes the reservation for all port for which no device
is found, currently attached or as phantom devices in the Device Manager.

"Remove non-present devices" uninstalls all currently non-present COM port devices from
the Device Manager.


Started with parameter /c it performs silently the "Clear unused reservations" operation.
Started with parameter /r it performs silently the "Remove non-present devices" operation.




Licence


COM Name Arbiter Tool is Freeware.

Allowed:
- usage in any environment, including commercial
- include in software products, including commercial
- include on CD/DVD of computer magazines

Not allowed:
- changing any of the files




Uwe Sieber
Nov 2021



